Most unicellular organisms are of microscopic size and are thus classified as microorganisms.
Eukaryotic organisms are characterized by the presence of a membrane-bound cell nucleus.
There is a long tradition of defining organisms as self-organizing beings.
All members of the species sapiens are genetically able to interbreed.
To operate they constantly take in and release energy.
Compounds that make up organisms may be divided into macromolecules and other, smaller molecules. 
Due to the selective permeability of the phospholipid membraine only specific compounds can pass through it.
Carbohydrates are the number one source of energy for all living organisms.
Multicellular organisms are able to specialize cells to perform specific functions.
Many multicellular organisms consist of several organ systems, which coordinate to allow for life.
Cells contain the hereditary information necessary for regulating cell functions and for transmitting information to the next generation of cells.
Prokaryotic cells lack a nuclear membrane so DNA is unbound within the cell.
The functioning of a cell depends upon its ability to extract and use chemical energy stored in organic molecules.
Cell contents are contained within a cell surface membrane that contains proteins and a lipid bilayer.
Some organisms live as short as one day, while some plants and fungi can live thousands of years.
The last universal ancestor is the most recent organism from which all organisms now living on Earth descend.
These sciences provide information about the history of the Earth and the changes produced by life.
All organisms on Earth are descended from a common ancestor or ancestral gene pool.
All organisms use the same genetic code to translate nucleic acid sequences into proteins.
Sexual reproduction is widespread among current eukaryotes.
All existing organisms share certain traits, including cellular structure and genetic code.
Attempts to shed light on the earliest history of life generally focus on the behavior of macromolecules.
In the last billion years, simple multicellular plants and animals began to appear in the oceans.
Fossil evidence indicates that the diversity and complexity of modern life has developed over much of the history of the earth.
Such comparative studies however are invariably biased by disparities in the time scales over which evolutionary change is measured in the laboratory.
Thus determining the phylogenetic history of a species can not be done conclusively by determining evolutionary trees for single genes.
The techniques used in cloning have the potential of creating entirely new species of organisms.
The life sciences are helpful in improving the quality and standard of life.
Genes are the primary units of inheritance in all organisms.
A sequence of DNA that codes for insulin in humans also codes for insulin when inserted into other organisms, such as plants.
The genetic information in a genome is held within genes, and the complete assemblage of this information in an organism is called its genotype.
This means stabilizing conditions by either reducing or increasing the activity of an organ or system.
The survival of a living organism depends on the continuous input of energy.
Chemical reactions that are responsible for its structure and function are tuned to extract energy from substances that act as its food and transform them to help form new cells and sustain them.
The organisms responsible for the introduction of energy into an ecosystem are known as producers or autotrophs.
Some of the captured energy is used to produce biomass to sustain life and provide energy for growth and development.
Physiology studies the mechanical, physical, and biochemical processes of living organisms by attempting to understand how all of the structures function as a whole.
The field of animal physiology extends the tools and methods of human physiology to non-human species.
Multiple speciation events create a tree structured system of relationships between species.
The habitat of an organism can be described as the local abiotic factors such as climate and ecology.
A microscopic bacterium in a local sugar gradient is responding to its environment as much as a lion searching for food in the African savanna.
An alternative view is that sex is an adaptation for promoting accurate DNA repair in germ-line DNA.
Only a small amount of theory treats the problem of modelling the generation of new variants through mutation.
The nature of connections in ecological communities cannot be explained by knowing the details of each species in isolation.
Preventing species extinctions is one way to preserve biodiversity and that goal rests on techniques that preserve genetic diversity.