Program execution might be likened to reading a book.
Each basic instruction can be given a short name that is indicative of its function and easy to remember.
Sometimes programs are executed by a hybrid method of the two techniques.
Read the code for the next instruction from the cell indicated by the program counter.
Increment the program counter so it points to the next instruction.
Instructions that modify the program counter are often known as "jumps" and allow for loops.
Early CPUs were composed of many separate components.
The set of arithmetic operations that a particular ALU supports may be limited to addition and subtraction.
The information stored in memory may represent practically anything.
The CPU contains a special set of memory cells called registers that can be read and written to much more rapidly than the main memory area.
Registers are used for the most frequently needed data items to avoid having to access main memory every time data is needed.
In some systems it is necessary to give the appearance of running several programs simultaneously.
One means by which this is done is with a special signal called an interrupt.
The interrupt generator might be causing several hundred interrupts per second.
It may appear that many programs are running at the same time even though only one is ever executing in any given instant.
This frees up time for other programs to execute so that many programs may be run simultaneously without unacceptable speed loss.
Such designs tend to be useful only for specialized tasks due to the large scale of program organization required to successfully utilize most of the available resources at once.
The technologies that made the Arpanet possible spread and evolved.
The network spread beyond academic and military institutions and became known as the Internet.
Initially these facilities were available primarily to people working in high-tech environments.
Logic gates are a common abstraction which can apply to most of the above digital or analog paradigms.
Programs that learn and adapt are part of the emerging field of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
There are thousands of different programming languages.
Firmware is the technology which has the combination of both hardware and software such as BIOS chip.
The act of processing is mainly regulated by the CPU.
A vulnerability is a system susceptibility or flaw.
They may have been added by an authorized party to allow some legitimate access.
Social engineering aims to convince a user to disclose secrets such as passwords.
The Internet is a potential attack vector for such machines if connected.
A successful attack on a military aviation system that controls munitions could have even more serious consequences.
Connected cars may use wifi and bluetooth to communicate with onboard consumer devices.
Another innovative feature for that time was the user interface combining a keyboard with a monitor and light pen for correcting texts and drawing on screen.
Workstations were characterized by high-performance processors and graphics displays.
Worldwide sales of PCs had begun to fall as many consumers moved to tablets and smartphones for gifts and personal use.
These systems had text-only displays and only floppy disks for storage.
Workstations are commonly connected to a local area network and run multi-user operating systems.
The monitor often utilizes a touchscreen as an optional method of user input.
The laptop is opened for use and closed up for transport.
Some internal upgrades to laptops, such as memory and hard disk drive upgrades are often easily performed.
Some use a limited range of desktop components to provide better performance at the expense of battery life.
Some motherboards have the video display adapter, sound and other peripherals integrated onto the motherboard.
This protects against overloading the supply, and guards against performance degradation.
Modern CPUs are equipped with a fan attached via heat sink.
Often a motherboard will also contain one or more peripheral buses and physical connectors for expansion purposes.
Main memory is much faster than mass storage devices like hard disk drives or optical discs.