It can be hard to draw the line between some early 1980s hard rock and heavy metal.
There are also many cases where a live performance in front of an audience is also recorded and distributed.
In the jam band scene, live, improvised jam sessions are preferred to studio recordings.
In some cases, a songwriter may not use notation at all, and instead compose the song in her mind and then play or record it from memory.
The standard body of choices and techniques present at a given time and a given place is referred to as performance practice.
They may consist of lead sheets or simply chord charts.
Improvisation is the act of instantaneous composition by performers, where compositional techniques are employed with or without preparation.
Improvisation was an important skill during the Baroque era and during the Classical era.
In the Classical era, solo performers and singers improvised virtuoso cadenzas during concerts.
Performers improvised ornaments and basso continuo keyboard players improvised chord voicings based on figured bass notation.
Depending on the definition of "element" being used, these can include: pitch, beat or pulse, tempo, rhythm, melody, harmony, texture, style, allocation of voices, timbre or color, dynamics, expression, articulation, form and structure.
All three curriculums identify pitch, dynamics, timbre and texture as elements.
Some entire Baroque dance suites for harpsichord from the early 1700s may use a single dynamic.
We can talk about the highness or lowness of pitch in the more general sense.
Precise pitch can only be determined in sounds that have a frequency that is clear and stable enough to distinguish from noise.
It is much easier for listeners to discern the pitch of a single note played on a piano than to try to discern the pitch of a crash cymbal that is struck.
A melody is a series of pitches sounding in succession, often in a rising and falling pattern.
The notes of a melody are typically created using pitch systems such as scales or modes.
Melodies also often contain notes from the chords used in the song.
The melodies in simple folk songs and traditional songs may use only the notes of a single scale.
A folk song in the key of C may have a melody that uses only the notes of the C major scale.
Bebop-era jazz from the 1940s and contemporary music from the 20th and 21st centuries may use melodies with many chromatic notes.
Usually this means the notes are played at the same time, although harmony may also be implied by a melody that outlines a harmonic structure.
The key of a piece determines the scale used, which centres around the "home note" or tonic of the key.
The key or "home note" of a song may change every four bars or even every two bars.
Rhythm is the arrangement of sounds and silences in time.
Meters are made easier to hear because songs and pieces often place an emphasis on the first beat of each grouping.
In pop and rock, the rhythm parts of a song are played by the rhythm section, which includes chord-playing instruments, a bass instrument and a drum kit player.
The texture of a piece or sing is determined by how the melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials are combined in a composition.
Texture is often described in regard to the density, or thickness, and range, or width, between lowest and highest pitches.
The thickness also is affected by the amount and the richness of the instruments.
Two bluegrass fiddlers playing the same traditional fiddle tune together will typically each vary the melody a bit and each add different ornaments.
Timbre, sometimes called "color" or "tone color" is the quality or sound of a voice or instrument.
A 440 Hz A note sounds different when it is played on oboe, piano, violin or electric guitar.
Even if different players of the same instrument play the same note, their notes might sound different due to differences in instrumental technique.
Even two instrumentalists playing the same note on the same instrument may sound different due to different ways of playing the instrument.
The performer can also change the tone by adjusting equalizer controls, tone controls on the instrument, and by using electronic effects units such as distortion pedals.
Western pop and rock songs are often in verse-chorus form, which is based around a sequence of verse and chorus sections.
Introductions and codas, when they are no more than that, are frequently excluded from formal analysis.
The alternation of two tunes gives enough variety to permit a dance to be extended for as long as desired.
This approach was popular in the 18th-century operatic aria, and was called da capo form.
A song has more need than a dance of a self-contained form with a beginning and an end of course.
This form has a recurring theme alternating with different sections called "episodes".
A recurring section, especially the main theme, is sometimes more thoroughly varied, or else one episode may be a "development" of it.
A similar arrangement is the ritornello form of the Baroque concerto grosso.
German Baroque composers wrote for small ensembles including strings, brass, and woodwinds, as well as for choirs and keyboard instruments such as pipe organ, harpsichord, and clavichord.distinct.
Classical instrumental melodies tended to be almost voicelike and singable.
Although Baroque composers also wrote sonatas, the Classical style of sonata is completely distinct.
The Baroque era improvised chord-playing of the continuo keyboardist or lute player was gradually phased out between 1750 and 1800.
During the late Romantic period, composers explored dramatic chromatic alterations of tonality, such as extended chords and altered chords, which created new sound "colours".